Chapter 3 - DSDL specification (#46)
UAVCAN/specification: specification/dsdl/serializable_types.tex

\section{Serializable types}\label{sec:dsdl_serializable_types}

Values of the serializable type category can be exchanged between nodes over the UAVCAN network.
This is opposed to the expression types (section \ref{sec:dsdl_expression_types}),
instances of which can only exist while DSDL definitions are being evaluated.
The data serialization rules are defined in the section \ref{sec:dsdl_data_serialization}.

\subsection{Void types}

Void types are used for padding purposes.
As will be explained in later sections, it is desirable to align field attributes at byte boundaries;
void types can be used to facilitate that.

> Void-typed field attributes are set to zero when an object is serialized and ignored when it is deserialized.

Reviewer: Do we have to require that they are zeroed? Can't we just specify that the actual value of the void types is undefined?

Author: We shouldn't lift this requirement because it simplifies the extension of data types in a backward-compatible way by adding new fields in place of padding fields. Example:

```python
# Version 1.1
float64 a
void64
```

```python
# Version 1.2
float64 a
float32 b  # Messages v1.1 will be interpreted such that b = 0.0
void32
```

Void types can be used to reserve space in data type definitions for possible use in later versions of the data type.

The DSDL name pattern for void types is as follows: ``\verb|void[1-9]\d*|'',
where the trailing integer represents its width, in bits,
ranging from 1 to 64, inclusive.

> Void types can be referred to directly by their name from any namespace.

Reviewer: Huh. I thought void types were anonymous. We can actually read these values?

Author: This is about types, not their values. This merely means that void types are not contained within some particular namespace, they are built-in, like `void` in C++.

    Op & Type & Description \\

    \texttt{\textbf{!}}     & $(\texttt{bool}) \rightarrow \texttt{bool}$ & Logical not. \\

    \texttt{\textbf{||}}    & $(\texttt{bool}, \texttt{bool}) \rightarrow \texttt{bool}$ & Logical or. \\
    \texttt{\textbf{\&\&}}  & $(\texttt{bool}, \texttt{bool}) \rightarrow \texttt{bool}$ & Logical and. \\

    \texttt{\textbf{==}}    & $(\texttt{bool}, \texttt{bool}) \rightarrow \texttt{bool}$ & Equality. \\
    \texttt{\textbf{!=}}    & $(\texttt{bool}, \texttt{bool}) \rightarrow \texttt{bool}$ & Inequality. \\

\end{UAVCANSimpleTable}

\subsubsection{Reference list}

An exhaustive list of all void and primitive types
ordered by bit length is provided below for reference.
Note that the cast mode specifier is omitted intentionally.

\immediate\write18{rm -f ../latex.tmp}
\immediate\write18{../render_list_of_void_and_primitive_types.py > ../latex.tmp}
\immediate\input{../latex.tmp}

\subsection{Array types}

An array type represents an ordered collection of values.
All values in the collection share the same type, which is referred to as \emph{array element type}.
The array element type can be any type except:
\begin{itemize}
    \item void type;

>     \item array type\footnote{Meaning that nested arrays are not allowed;

Reviewer: Huh. Why not?

Author: We may allow them someday later. There are two weak reasons against nested arrays:

- The grammar gets slightly more complex. A naive addition of nested arrays would require us to make the array matching rule `type_array` left-recursive, which some parsers/generators may not support.  We can deal with this, though, if necessary, so it's not a huge deal.
- Variable-length nested arrays would often lead to misaligned data due to the length prefix being of weird bit width. Misaligned data is bad: https://github.com/UAVCAN/pydsdl/pull/24.

If one needs nested arrays, the following should be done instead:

```python
Nested.1.0[<=100] two_dimensional_array
```

```python
# Nested.1.0
void1  # Alignment
float16[<=100] one_dimensional_array
@assert _offset_.min % 8 == 0  # Yup, the data is aligned
```

Do you have any particular use cases in mind where nested arrays might be very desirable?

\begin{itemize}
    \item ``\verb|<|'' (ASCII code 60) --- indicates that the integer value yielded by the array capacity expression
    specifies the non-inclusive upper boundary of the number of elements.

    \item ``\verb|<=|'' (ASCII code 60 followed by 61) --- same as above, but the upper boundary is inclusive.
\end{itemize}
If neither of the above prefixes are provided, the resultant definition is that of a fixed-length array.

\subsection{Composite types}\label{sec:dsdl_composite_types}

\subsubsection{Kinds}

There are two kinds of composite data type definitions: message types and service types.
All versions of a data type must be of the same kind\footnote{%
For example, if a data type version 0.1 is of a message kind, all later versions of it must be messages, too.}.

A message data type defines one data schema.

A service data type contains two data schema definitions:
one for service request object, and one for service response object, in that order.
The two schemas are separated by the service response marker (``\verb|---|'') on a separate line.

The presence of the service response marker indicates that the data type definition at hand is of the service kind.

> There may be no more than one service response marker in a given definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only one service response marker shall appear in a given definition.
```

Author: Replaced this with "At most one service response marker shall appear in a given definition."

\subsubsection{Dependencies}

In order to refer to a composite type from another composite type definition
(e.g., for nesting or for referring to an external constant),
one has to specify the full data type name of the referred data type followed by its
major and minor version numbers separated by the namespace separator character,
as demonstrated on the figure \ref{fig:dsdl_nested_reference}.

To facilitate look-up of external dependencies,
implementations are expected to obtain from external sources%
\footnote{For example, from user-provided configuration options.}
the list of directories that are the roots of namespaces containing the referred dependencies.

\begin{figure}[H]
    $$
    \underbrace{\texttt{\huge{uavcan.node.Heartbeat}}}_{\text{full data type name}}%
    \texttt{\huge{.}}%
    \underbrace{\texttt{\huge{1.0}}}_{\substack{\text{version} \\ \text{numbers}}}%
    $$

>     \caption{Reference to an external composite data type definition.\label{fig:dsdl_nested_reference}}

Reviewer: Should we support a >=< syntax to allow some flexibility here? We might otherwise cause cascading changes that were unnecessary.

Author: Would be a mistake. See this and the next two posts: https://forum.uavcan.org/t/the-case-for-code-compatibility/194/10?u=pavel.kirienko

Currently, we provide a hard guarantee that once a given version of a data type is released, it is to be never changed again excepting whitespaces, comments, and `@deprecated`. It is important for maintainability and compatibility. Automatic switch to a newer version would remove this guarantee.

    \texttt{\huge{.}}%
    \underbrace{\texttt{\huge{1.0}}}_{\substack{\text{version} \\ \text{numbers}}}%
    $$
    \caption{Reference to an external composite data type definition located in the same namespace.
    \label{fig:dsdl_nested_reference_short}}
\end{figure}

Circular dependencies are not permitted.
A circular dependency renders all of the definitions involved in the dependency loop invalid.

If any of the referred definitions are marked as deprecated,
the referring definition must be marked deprecated as well\footnote{%
Deprecation is indicated with the help of a special directive, as explained in section \ref{sec:dsdl_directives}}.
If a non-deprecated definition refers to a deprecated definition,
the referring definition is malformed\footnote{%
This tainting behavior is designed to prevent unexpected breakage of
type hierarchies when one of the deprecated dependencies reaches its end of life.}.

\subsubsection{Unions}\label{sec:dsdl_composite_tagged_unions}

Any data schema definition can be supplied with a special directive (section \ref{sec:dsdl_directives})
indicating that it forms a tagged union.

> A tagged union schema must contain at least two field attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A tagged union schema shall contain at least two field attributes.
```

> A tagged union must not contain padding field attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A tagged union shall not contain padding field attributes.
```

> The value of a tagged union object is a function of the field attribute which value it is currently holding

Reviewer: This sentence is missing commas but should be revised per my previous  comments about  tagged union  value functions.
